# Datacenter excercise - Week 2 -  Rahul Dharmchand sp20-516-223

The datacenter chapter provided us details about different types of Data Center, their energy usage, CO<sub>2</sub> emmission and how PUE matters. Making these datacenters efficient and clean is the main goal of providers as well as governments of many countries.

## E.datacenter.2a

Source : https://www.salesforce.com/content/dam/web/en_us/www/documents/white-papers/sustainability-FY19-stakeholder-impact-report.pdf

As per the above sustainability report from Salesforce, added the information related to their Chandler, AZ data center to the sheet.

## E.datacenter.2b
Salesforce has about 13 of their own Data Centers in various locations/regions and Chandler, AZ is the largest one (as of Jan 2020). As per the report, in 2019 this datacenter consumed about 119 million kWh of energy and caused 57000 metric ton of CO<sub>2</sub> emission.

Data Center             Location        Year    Electicity Cost     IT Load     Yearly Cost     Yearly CO<sub>2</sub> Footprint     Equivalent of Cars                
-----------             ------------    ----    ---------------     -------     -----------     --------------------------------    -------------------       
Pheonix Data Center     Chandler, AZ    2019    8.84c/kWh                       $118,744,000                                57000                  12102

## E.Datacenter.3

My personal carbon footprint is about 43 tons CO<sub>2</sub>eq/year.

## E.Datacenter.4

HID Module 6 => 3%6 = 3, so I choose Thermal.

The word "Thermal" originated from greek word Theme means heat. Thermal energy is energy produced generally using heat/combustion. Traditionally coal is used to heat boilers with water and the stream produced is to used to turn large turbines. These rotating turbines through electromagnetism produces electricity. 

Though coal has bean a major resource used by thermal plants, but it has a hugh carbon footprint. This lead to usage of renewable resources like natural gas, biomass and other types of combustible oils to produce electricity in recent years. From [link](https://spectrum.ieee.org/energywise/telecom/internet/iceland-data-center-paradise), countries like Iceland are also finding ways to use geothermal energy to power data centers. 

From this article from [renewableenergyworld.com](https://www.renewableenergyworld.com/2020/01/16/new-ferc-report-shows-renewables-were-leading-source-of-new-capacity-in-2019/?topic=263626), Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has observed that in 2019 renewables have increased their generation capacity (as of Nov 2019) and this trend will continue in coming years. 

Geothermal energy is also used to cool data centers. Following data centers use geothermal energy to cool ([source](https://www.datacenterknowledge.com/geothermal-data-centers))
* American College Testing (Iowa)
* Prairie Bunkers, LLC (Nebraska)
* Verne Global (Iceland)

## E.Datacenter.5

In order to reduce carbon footprint (reason for global warming), many countries and companies are heavily invested in using renewalable energy sources as well innovative ways to reuse energy. One such innovation is to reuse heat generated by IT equipments/servers in data centers. As large data centers tend to produce a lot of heat, this heat can be reused to either generate electricity or heating nearby homes and offices. The [link](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210670718314318) provides detailed analysis regarding this.

* Facebook at its [Odense Data Center (Odense, Denmark)](https://sustainability.fb.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Waste_Heat_Recovery_Final_Jun2019.pdf) uses heat produced by servers which after recycling can be used in local district heating system. 

## E.Datacenter.8

In recent years, all major IT companies (Amazon, Facebook, Google, Salesforce etc) had data center outages. It not only affects their business, but also all the businesses that depend on their services. 
According to Gartner ([source](https://data-economy.com/outages-downtime-system-failures-2019s-it-meltdowns/)), the average cost of an IT outage is $5600 per minute. But that's just the one part. Depending on the type of business, the loss due to downtime could be $14000 per hour for low end and as much as $540000 per hour for high end centers.

Costco had an outage on Thanksgiving day in 2019 disabling its members from shopping online. Costco lost about 11 million in sales just because the website was too slow most of the time and completely out for sometime. 

Facebook 14 hour partial outage on Nov 29, 2019:
* Reason for outage: Server configuration change.
* Everyday about 1.4 users use facebook which is equivalent to quarter of world's population. An partial outage would have impacted about half a billion users. 
* Facebook stock was down 1.2% due to this outage as facebook will loose ad revenue from its pages.
* Many Facebook users conduct business through Facebook and Instagram and a downtime means they loose business as well. 
* As the impact was so large, could not find any information related to affected users or loss in revenue. 

According to this [article](https://www.information-management.com/news/how-much-does-downtime-really-cost) a approximate cost of an downtime/outage can be computed using 

Hourly Labor Cost = P * A * C

Where: 

* P = number of people affected 
* A = average percentage they are affected 
* C = average employee cost (salaries or wages + benefits)   

